---
publish: true
aliases: Overdetermined System
created: 2022-02-22T20:20:09
modified: 2025-08-05T21:56:05
published: 2026-01-06T20:10:18.130-05:00
tags:
  - pub-stat
type: note
sup:
  - "[[Regression]]"
  - "[[Machine Learning]]"
state: done
related:
  - "[[Ridge Regression]]"
---

# Linear Regression

Linear regression adopts a linear-in-parameter regression function model ${ f\_{w} }_{w\in\R^{n}}$ such that
$$\hat{y} = f_{w}(x) = w^Tx.$$
In this note, we focus on real-valued output $y\in\R$. We can think of $w$ as a set of **weights** that determine how each feature affects the prediction.

Linear regression is the _correct_ model for data generated by a ==linear model==:
$$
Y\_{i} = w^TX\_{i} + \epsilon \_{i},
$$
where $\epsilon \_{i}$ is a zero-mean random noise. If the noise follows a [[Normal Distribution|Gauss distribution]], we get a [[Gaussian Linear Model]], whose estimator of $w$ have nice properties.

Suppose we have collected $n$ sample points $(X\_{i},Y\_{i})$, the matrix form of the model is
$$
Y = Xw + \epsilon,
$$
where $X = (X\_{1},\dots,X\_{n})^{T}\in\R^{n\times d}$ is called the ==design matrix==, $Y=(Y\_{1},\dots,Y\_{n})^T\in\R^{n}$ is the output vector, and $\epsilon=(\epsilon\_{1},\dots,\epsilon \_{n})^T\in\R^{n}$ is the noise vector. Regression focuses on fitting the collected (training) data, corresponding to a ==fixed design== problem; [[Prediction]] focuses on predicting the new (test) data, corresponding to a ==random design== problem.

## Ordinary Least Squares

We use [[Mean Squared Error]] as the performance measure
$$\operatorname{MSE}\_{\mathrm{train /test}} = \frac{1}{m}\sum\_i(\hat{y}\_i^{(\mathrm{train /test})} - y\_i^{(\mathrm{train /test})})^2 = \frac{1}{m}|{\bf\hat{y}^{(\mathrm{train /test})} - \bf{y}^{(\mathrm{train /test})}}|\_2^2$$ ^obj

==Ordinary least squares== linear regression with a fixed design minimizes the $\operatorname{MSE\_{train}}$. From now on we drop the $(\mathrm{train})$ superscript.
The solution is just the ==least squares estimator (LSE)== of $w$ ([[M-Estimator]] with [[Risk]] being MSE). Since the MSE is convex, we have
$$\begin{aligned}
&\nabla\_w \operatorname{MSE}\_{\mathrm{train}} = 0\\
\Rightarrow \ \ & \nabla\_w | {{X}w - y}|\_2^2 = 0\\
\Rightarrow \ \ & \nabla\_w  \left({{X}w - y}\right)^T\left({{X}w - y}\right) = 0\\
\Rightarrow \ \ & 2{ X}^T{ Xw} - 2 { X}^T{ y}= 0\\
\Rightarrow \ \ & { w} = \left({ X}^T{ X}\right)^{-1}{ X}^T{ y}
\end{aligned}$$
^sol

The last set of equations is known as ==normal equations==.
Clearly, the least squares estimator requires $X$ to be full column rank, meaning that there are more samples than features.
When there are more features than samples, which is common in the high-dimensional setting, we have an [[Underdetermined Linear System]] and there are infinitely many solutions with the lest square error, and we usually seek the ==least norm== solution.

- The geometric perception of the solution is $Xw\_{\mathrm{LS}} = \operatorname{proj}_{\operatorname{span}X}y$. Therefore, $w_{\mathrm{LS}}$ achieves the optimality. ^69df70

### Misspecified Model

Consider a general non-parametric statistical model, $(X\_i, Y\_i) \overset{\text{iid}}{ \sim } P \in \mathcal{P} { P : P \in \operatorname{dist}(\mathbb{R}^{d+1}) \text{ w/ finite fourth moment} }$ .
The least square solution is targeting $w^\* = \operatorname\*{argmin}\_w \mathbb{E}\[(Y\_i - X\_i^\top w)^2]$, i.e., _best_ linear model of $Y\_i$ given $Z\_i$. By [[Law of Large Numbers|LLN]] and [[Convergence of Random Variables#Continuous Mapping Theorem|CMT]], $\hat{w}^{\mathrm{LS}} \xrightarrow{P} w^\*$. Further $\hat{w}^{\mathrm{LS}}$ is asymptotically normal with some asymptotic variance $\Sigma$, which consists of the sample noise and misspecification noise.

More specifically, let's look at the expression of $w^{_}$. Similar to the derivation of the normal equation, we have
$$
\begin{aligned}
&\nabla \_{w} \mathbb{E}\[(Y-X^Tw)^{2}] = 0\\
\implies & \nabla \_{w}\left( \mathbb{E}Y^{2} - 2 w^T \mathbb{E}XY + w^T(\mathbb{E}XX^T)w \right)  = 0 \\
\implies & w^{_} = \left(\mathbb{E}XX^T\right)^{-1}\mathbb{E}XY.
\end{aligned}
$$
To incorporate the intercept, we can add a constant $1$ to the first dimension of each observation $X' = (1; X)$. Then $w^{_} = (a^{_},b^{_})$, where $a^{_}\in\R$ is the intercept and $b^{_}\in\R^{d}$ is the slope. And using the [[Schur Complement]], we have
$$
\begin{pmatrix}
a^{_}\b^{\*}
\end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix}
1 + \mathbb{E}X^T \Cov(X)^{-1}\mathbb{E}X & -\mathbb{E}X ^T \Cov(X)^{-1}\ -\Cov(X)^{-1}\mathbb{E} X & \Cov(X)^{-1}
\end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix}
\mathbb{E}Y \ \mathbb{E}XY
\end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix}
\mathbb{E}Y + \mathbb{E}X^T \Cov(X)^{-1}\Cov(X,Y) \ \Cov(X)^{-1}\Cov(X,Y)
\end{pmatrix}.
$$
We can see that the slope measures the correlation between $Z$ and $Y$.

Let's define the residual $\epsilon _{i} = Y_{i} - X\_i^Tw^{_}$. Then, with the additional constant component, we have $\mathbb{E}\epsilon _{i} = 0$ and
$$
\Cov(X_{i},\epsilon _{i}) = \Cov(X_{i},Y\_{i}) - \Cov(X\_{i})w^{_} = \mathbf{0}.
$$
Therefore, we can see that although the noise $\epsilon$ now consists of both the sample noise and the misspecification noise, it is still uncorrelated with the input $X$ and has zero mean.

- Importantly, zero correlation does not imply independence. Clearly, for a misspecified model, $Y - X^Tw^{\*}| X=x$ can have a larger variance and bias for some $x$ than others, and the noise $\epsilon$ is not independent of $X$. The intercept balances out the overall bias and the slope turns _perpendicular_ to the residual, which is consistent with the geometric perception of LSE.

### Bias

We can see that it is more natural and general to use **affine functions** instead of linear functions as regression functions:
$$\hat{y} = w^Tx + b$$
where $b\in\R$, is called the ==bias parameter== or the ==intercept term==, for the prediction is biased toward being $b$ in the absence of any input. This term is important to achieve an zero-mean residual ([[#Misspecified Model]]).

Attaching a constant 1 to the first dimension of each observation $x\_i$ is a simple way to adopt this bias term: $\hat{y} = (b; w)^{T}(1;x)$. Thus, linear regression encompasses affine functions.

## A Probabilistic View: Maximum Likelihood Estimation

Suppose our residual noise follows a [[Normal Distribution|Gaussian]] distribution $\epsilon \sim \mathcal{N}(0,\sigma^{2}I)$, then our statistical model is $y \given x \sim \mathcal{N}(w^Tx, \sigma^{2})$ parameterized by $w$. Or, given a fixed design, $Y\sim \mathcal{N}(Xw,\sigma^{2}I)$. ^c69bce

Then, the [[Maximum Likelihood Estimation]] of $w$ is
$$\begin{aligned}
w &= \argmax\_w \sum\_i \log P(Y\_i | X\_i; w) \\
&=\argmax\_w \left(-m\log \sigma - \frac{m}{2}\log(2\pi) - \sum\_i \frac{|\hat{Y}\_i - Y\_i|^2}{2\sigma^2}\right)\\
&=\argmin\_w \sum\_i |\hat{Y}\_i - Y\_i|^2\\
&=\argmin\_w |Y - Xw|^2\\
&=\argmin\_w \operatorname{MSE}
\end{aligned}$$
^mle-obj

Therefore, if the data-generating model is a [[Gaussian Linear Model]], i.e., the noise is an independent/multivariate [[Normal Distribution|Gaussian]] noise, LSE is equivalent to MLE.
Further, under this assumption, $w\_{\mathrm{MLE}}$ is an unbiased estimate of $w$:
$$
\mathbb{E}\[w\_{\mathrm{MLE}}] = \mathbb{E}\[(X^{T}X)^{-1}X^{T}y] = (X^{T}X)^{-1}X\mathbb{E}\[y] = (X^{T}X)^{-1}X^TXw = w.
$$

^biass

The variance of MLE is
$$
\begin{aligned}
\Var\[w\_{\mathrm{MLE}}]
\=& \mathbb{E}\[w\_{\mathrm{MLE}}w\_{\mathrm{MLE}}^{T}] - \mathbb{E}\[w\_{\mathrm{MLE}}]\mathbb{E}\[w\_{\mathrm{MLE}}]^{T}\\
\= & \mathbb{E}\left\[\left(X^T X\right)^{-1} X^T Y Y^T X\left(X^T X\right)^{-1}\right]-w w^T \\
\= & \left(X^T X\right)^{-1} X^T \mathbb{E}\left\[Y Y^T\right] X\left(X^T X\right)^{-1}-w w^T \\
\= & \left(X^T X\right)^{-1} X^T (\Var(Y) + \mathbb{E}\[Y]\mathbb{E}\[Y]^{T}) X\left(X^T X\right)^{-1}-w w^T \\
\= & \left(X^T X\right)^{-1} X^T\left(\sigma^2 I+X w w^T X^T\right) X\left(X^T X\right)^{-1}-w w^T \\
\= & \left(X^T X\right)^{-1} X^T \sigma^2 I X\left(X^T X\right)^{-1}+ \\
& \left(X^T X\right)^{-1} X^T X w w^T X^T X\left(X^T X\right)^{-1}-w w^T \\
\= & \sigma^2\left(X^T X\right)^{-1}\\
\= & \sigma^{2}V\Sigma ^{-2}V^{T},
\end{aligned}
$$

^var

where $X = U\Sigma V^{T}$ is the [[Singular Value Decomposition]] of $X$.
And thus the final MSE is
$$
\operatorname{MSE}(w\_{\mathrm{MLE}}) = \mathbb{E}|w\_{\mathrm{MLE}}-w|^{2}
\= \mathbb{E} \tr((w\_{\mathrm{MLE}} - w)(w\_{\mathrm{MLE}} - w)^{T}))
\= \tr(\Var (w\_{\mathrm{MLE}}))
\= \sigma^{2}\tr(\left(X^T X\right)^{-1}).
$$

- When the data are highly correlated, there will be small singular values, the values of $w\_{\mathrm{MLE}}$ are very sensitive to the measured data $y$ and give unstable predictions for new data. This is bad if we want to analyze and predict using $w\_{\mathrm{MLE}}$.

[[Ridge Regression]] can help with this problem.

> [!rmk] Why "squares"?
>
> The nice properties of least squares estimation and its connection to [[Normal Distribution|Gaussian distribution]] are not coincidences. The hidden player is the **Euclidean geometry**. Recall that an alternative definition of the [[Normal Distribution#Equivalent Definitions for Multivariate Normal Distribution|Gaussian distribution]] is that it's some affine transformation of some **rotation**-invariant distribution; and the [[#^69df70|geometric perception]] of LSE is that it is doing orthogonal **projection**. Here, both rotation and projection are with respect to the Euclidean geometry. More specifically, both Gaussian distributions and the $\ell\_{2}$ norm in [[Mean Squared Error|MSE]] are defined using the natural [[Inner Product]] of a self-dual vector space, which is the Euclidean space, giving natural quadratic (bilinear) forms.

## Polynomial Regression

We can also use a polynomial function of degree _n_ to fit the 2-D data. Then our estimation becomes

$$\hat{y} = w\_nx^n + \dots + w\_1x + b$$ ^poly

- In polynomial regression, $n$ is often a [[Hyperparameter]]

The polynomial regression is the generalization of linear regression with bias parameter; however, it can be turned into a linear regression:
$$\hat{y} = \tilde{w}^T\tilde{x} \triangleq (b,w\_1,\dots,w\_n) (x^0,x^1,\dots,x^n)^T$$

- Thus we can solve the polynomial regression in the same way as solving the linear regression. Actually, by the definition of linear regression, polynomial regression is still linear.

### High-Dimensional Data

Polynomial regression can also apply to high-dimensional data. Similarly, we can extend an observation $x = (x\_{1}, \dots, x\_{d})$ to
$$
\tilde{x} = (x\_{1},\dots,x\_{d}, x\_{1}^{2},\dots,x\_{d}^{2},\dots).
$$

We can also add features like $x\_{1}x\_{2}$.

## Generalized Linear Regression

By the definition of linear regression, the general form of linear regression is
$$
y\_i \approx f\left(x\_i, w\right)=\sum\_{s=1}^S g\_s\left(x\_i\right) w\_s = w^{T}G(x\_i).
$$
For example,
$$
\begin{aligned}
& g\_s\left(x\_i\right)=x\_{i j}^2 \\
& g\_s\left(x\_i\right)=\log x\_{i j} \\
& g\_s\left(x\_i\right)=\mathbb{I}\left(x\_{i j}\<a\right) \\
& g\_s\left(x\_i\right)=\mathbb{I}\left(x\_{i j}\<x\_{i j^{\prime}}\right)
\end{aligned}
$$

As long as the function is linear in $w$, we can construct the matrix $X$ by putting the transformed $x\_i$ on row $i$, and solve $w\_{\mathrm{LS}} =(X^TX)^{−1}X^Ty$.

- As the number of functions increases, we need more data to avoid [[Overfitting and Underfitting|overfitting]].

The indicator functions are called ==dummy variables==, and the functions that depend on more than one factor (like the last example) capture the interaction effects.
The whole model is called a ==generalized linear regression model==, and ${ g\_{s} }\_{s=1}^{S}$ are called basis functions.

Choosing indicator functions as basis functions gives ==step function regression==.
Another example of a generalized linear regression model is [[Splines]].

### Dummy Variables for Qualitative Predictors

We can use dummy variables (indicator functions) to represent qualitative predictors. One problem is, if we introduce a dummy variable for each level of a qualitative predictor, the matrix $X$ will be singular. To avoid this, we can introduce $k-1$ dummy variables for a qualitative predictor with $k$ levels. The left level can be regarded as the control/baseline/reference category.
Then, the slope of each dummy variable represents the **difference** between the corresponding level and the baseline category.
And the difference between different slopes represents the **difference** between different levels.
